The author says to always watch your thoughts because they become your words, always be careful with your words because they become actions and always be attentive towards your actions because they become your habit, always be focused towards your habits because they become your character and always watch your character because it becomes your Destiny.

A very intelligent thought said by James Allen “A MAN SOONER OR LATER WILL DISCOVER THAT HE IS THE MASTER-GARDENER OF HIS SOUL, THE DIRECTOR OF HIS LIFE.”

James Allen says that “A MAN HAS TO LEARN THAT HE CANNOT COMMAND THINGS, BUT HE CAN COMMAND HIMSELF, THAT HE CANNOT COERCE THE WILL  OF OTHERS, BUT THAT HE CAN MOLD AND MASTER HIS OWN WILL, AND THINGS SERVE HIM WHO SERVES TRUTH, PEOPLE SEEK GUIDANCE OF HIM WHO IS MASTER OF HIMSELF.”

As a Man Thinketh Summary, Chapter 1: Thought and Character
In this chapter, the author says that As a Man Thinketh is in his heart so he is, The author says that the man is literally what he thinks of himself, a Man character is the complete sum of all his thoughts, to make us understand this concept more clearly author says that as the plant springs from and could not be without seeds, similarly every act of man springs from the hidden seeds of thoughts, and could not have appeared without them.

The author says that the act is the blossom of thoughts, and joy and suffering are its fruits, hence whatever man garners whether it’s bitter or sweet, it is the fruitage of his own husbandry.

The author says that thought is what makes us, Thought of a man makes him, hence if you have negative thoughts then such thoughts will bring evil and bad things in your life but if you have good positive thoughts that such positive thoughts will bring joy and happiness in your life.

Read More: The 4 Disciplines of Execution Summary and Review

As a Man Thinketh Summary, Chapter 2: Effect of Thought on Circumstances
In this chapter, the author says that “WE ARE WHERE WE ARE BASED ON OUR THOUGHTS AND OUR ACTIONS”. The author says that it’s not that external force don’t have influence, but that on balance we are each the master of our own destiny.

As a Man Thinketh Summary, Chapter 3: Effect of thoughts on body and health
in this chapter, the author says that the body is the servant of mind, our body obeys the operations of our mind, whether they are deliberately chosen or automatically expressed, author, writes that habit of thought will produce their own effect, good or bad, here author is basically saying that clean body will have clean mind and a clean living. The author says that people who live their lives in fear disease are the people who get it, the author says that a sour face does not come by chance it comes by the sour thoughts.

As a Man Thinketh Summary, Chapter: Thought and purpose
The author says that Doubt and Fear are the greatest enemies of Knowledge, and people who encourage them, never stop them are the ones who face them in every step of their life.

Read More: Verbal Judo Summary / Review

As a Man Thinketh Summary, Chapter 5: The Thought-Factor in Achievement
In this chapter, The author says that all that man achieves and all that man fails to achieve are the results of his own thoughts You must have heard the phrase whether you think you can or think you can’t both ways you are right, similarly people fail or pass depends on their own thoughts, Author also says that the person who achieves little are the ones who sacrificed little and the ones who achieved much are the ones who sacrificed much.

As a Man Thinketh Summary, Chapter 6: Visions and Ideals
Here author says That Desires are to obtain and Aspire is to Achieve, Author says that Dream Lofty dreams, the author says that as you dream, as you will become and vision is the promise what you shall be one day, author says that your ideal is the prophecy your prediction of what you shall, at last, unveil, The author says that Dreams are the seedling of realities,  You will become as small as your controlling desire and as great as your Dominant Aspiration.

Read More: Get Anyone to Do Anything Summary & Review

As a Man Thinketh Summary, Chapter 7: Serenity
the author says that the beautiful and the most extraordinary poise of character is serenity, and serenity is the last lesson of culture, The author says that the calmness of mind is one of the beautiful jewels of the wisdom. Author ask you to keep your hands firmly on the helm of thoughts.
