The story is narrated by a young girl name Jean Louise Finch, nicknamed Scout, who begins by telling us a little bit of back story about her family and her father, Atticus Finch. Atticus is a respected lawyer who is one of the few citizens left in their town, Maycomb, Alabama that makes a solid, comfortable living. Gripped by the Great Depression, most of the rest of the town has fallen on hard times. The Finches live in a house on the main residential street in Maycomb with their cook, Calpurnia who also acts as a housekeeper and helps raise the children.

The book begins in the summer of 1933 when Scout is almost six and her brother is ten. That summer a boy named Charles Baker Harris moves in next door to live with his aunt. The boy, who calls himself Dill, has been sent to stay the summer with his aunt, Rachel. Scout and Jem quickly take to Dill and the three children become regular playmates. One day, Dill notices a run-down, dilapidated house on their block and asks Scout about it. She tells him that it belongs to a man called Nathan Radley who lives there with his brother, Arthur who everyone calls “Boo”.

Boo Radley has not been seen outside his house in years and lives as a shut-in for unknown reasons. Scout only knows the story which has been passed around the town’s children, that Boo was imprisoned in the house as punishment by his father after he got into trouble with the law as a young boy. He was not seen again until fifteen years later, when he stabbed his father with a pair of scissors. The people of the town insisted that Boo was crazy and needed to be put in an institution, but his father refused and when he died Boo’s older brother, Nathan came to live in the house with Boo.
Dill becomes enamored with the story and tries to convince Scout and Jem to help him lure Boo out of his house. Not making any headway there, he finally dares Jem to run up and touch the house and he does so hastily, sprinting back across the lawn afterward. Scout notes that she thinks she sees a shutter on the Radley house move slightly as if someone were peeking out.

At the end of the summer, Dill leaves Maycomb to return to his mother’s house and the Finch children prepare to start school. Scout in particular is excited about starting school as it is her first year. However, she quickly finds that her teacher, Miss Caroline doesn’t like children very much and seems to be openly contemptuous of them. Once she is back home, Scout tells her father that she doesn’t want to go to school anymore and asks if he could teach her himself. Atticus says that it is the law that she go to school, but promises to keep reading to her and teaching her when he can.

One day while Scout is walking home from school, she passes the Radley house and notices some tinfoil in a knothole in one of the Radley’s trees. Inside the tinfoil are two pieces of chewing gum. Scout chews both pieces until Jem hears of it and makes her spit them out from fear that they are poisoned. However, soon after the two children find two old “Indian-head” pennies hidden in the same knothole and decide to keep them.

Summer comes and Dill returns and the three playmates pick up where they left off. Except this time they began to play a game called “Boo Radley” where they act out the Radley clans story as they know it. Eventually Atticus see them playing and asks if their game is about the Radleys. Jem lies out of fear of getting in trouble and Atticus seems placated. But later he spots Jem and Dill attempting to stick a note onto the window of the Radley house with a fishing pole. Realizing what they’re doing, Atticus orders them to “stop tormenting that man” and to stop playing the Boo Radley game. The children obey him for a little while until on Dill’s last day in town, they decide to sneak into the Radley place and peek in through a loose shutter. They are successful in their game until, looking in through the windows they see a shadow of a man with a hat and get spooked into fleeing. As they run away they hear a shotgun go off behind them. In the retreat, Jem’s pants become stuck on a fence and he has to kick them off to get free. Later, when Jem is able to sneak back to the house to retrieve his pants, he finds that they have been freshly mended and hung on the fence.

The next day the children find another present hidden in the knothole, a ball of gray twine. Soon more gifts begin to show up including chewing gum, a spelling bee medal, an old pocket watch and two figures carved out of soap that resemble Jem and Scout. Then one day the Finches find that the knothole has been plugged up with cement. Nathan Radley tells them that he did it because the tree is dying.

A short while later a neighbor, Miss Maudie’s house burns down one night. Atticus wakes up the children and they all go out to help save what they can from the house. Scout sits down on a curb to await her father and in the confusion someone places a blanket on her shoulders to keep her warm. When Atticus asks her who did it she realizes that she doesn’t know and Jem assumes that it was Boo Radley. He tells their father the whole story of the knothole and the mended pants and Atticus warns the children to keep the story to themselves. Scout is so frightened by the idea of Boo standing just behind her that she nearly vomits.

The next day, Scout nearly starts a fight with a boy when he makes fun of her for a case that Atticus has recently acquired. The case is the defense of a man named Tom Robinson, a black man who is accused of raping a white woman. Atticus tells Scout that he took the case because he believes that Tom is innocent and he feels that he must defend him to uphold his personal sense of justice. Later though, Scout overhears her father saying that Tom Robinson is probably doomed as it is inconceivable that an all-white jury would acquit him.

Soon the children begin to face comments and abuse from their former friends and neighbors about their father’s defense of Tom Robinson. The town of Maycomb, whose inhabitants have thus far been painted in a positive light, begin to turn on the Finches, furious that Atticus, their best lawyer would represent a black man. Scout and Jem begin to see the town differently, now exposed to the childishness of the adults in their world and the seedy underbelly and racism of the town that they love dearly. Atticus cautions the children to avoid getting in any fights and to rise above the townspeople who are bullying them. To make matters worse, Dill does not come to Maycomb that year, instead sending a letter to say that his mother has remarried and he is living with her and her new husband. Scout is upset by this and by the fact that Jem seems to be growing up and pulling away from her.

Calpurnia, the housekeeper, decides to take Scout and Jem to her church. The children have never been to a black church before and are shocked to find that though this is the only black church in town, it only has one hymnal and that few of the parishioners can even read. However, the congregation is generally very friendly to the children and tell them that they know Atticus. After the service, Scout learns that Tom Robinson was accused by the white girl’s father, Bob Ewell. Since Ewell is the notorious town drunk, Scout wonders why anyone would take his accusation seriously.
As the trial begins to take shape, Jem and Scout find that they have to endure even more whispers and disapproving glances when they’re in town. With tensions high, Jem and Scout begin to argue with each other and one night after Atticus breaks up the fight and sends them to bed, they discover that Dill is hiding under Scout’s bed.

Dill tells them that he has run away from his home because his parents weren’t paying attention to him. He says that he took a train and covered the remaining distance from the station on the back of a cotton wagon. Jem tells Atticus and Atticus makes the boy comfortable with food and a bed before going next door to tell his aunt Rachel of his whereabouts.

A week later, a group of men come to the Finches door led by the sheriff. As his trial is getting closer, Tom Robinson is going to be moved to the Maycomb jail and they are worried about the town forming a lynch mob. The following evening Atticus leaves the house early to go into town. Jem, Scout and Dill sneak out to follow him and find him sitting in front of the Maycomb jail reading a newspaper. Jem suggests that they don’t bother him. As they turn to leave, four cars drive up and a group of men get out and demand that Atticus move away from the jailhouse door. Atticus refuses and Scout races to his side, followed by Jem and Dill. Worried for their safety, Atticus orders the children to go home but they refuse. One of the men in the mob informs Atticus that he has 15 seconds to take his children and leave. Scout recognizes Mr. Cunningham, the father of one of her classmates, in the crowd. She begins talking to him about his son and Mr. Cunningham gets so ashamed that he tells the men to disperse.

After they depart Mr. Underwood, the owner of the town’s newspaper speaks from a nearby window. He tells Atticus that he: “had him covered all the time” and holds up a shotgun. Atticus and Mr. Underwood talk for a while and then Atticus takes the children home.
The next day the trial begins. Scores of people from all over the county show up in the courtroom supporting both sides. The trial is presided over by Judge Taylor a man who has a reputation for running a more informal court room. Thinking that they will sneak in, Scout and Jem arrive at the trial a bit late and are only able to find seats when Reverend Sykes from Calpurnia’s church allows them to sit in the balcony where the black audience is required to sit. Mr. Gilmer, the prosecutor begins the trial by questioning the sheriff and the town doctor who both admit that the white woman, Mayella Ewell, told them that she had been raped by Tom Robinson. The doctor also says that the bruises that he found on Mayella’s face were concentrated on the right side.

Next on the stand is Mayella’s father, Bob. Bob Ewell is described as the town drunk and a rude, nasty little man. He testifies that on the night in question he heard Mayella screaming from inside their house and saw Tom Robinson raping her from a window. He ran in and Robinson fled, Ewell called for the town sheriff after that. Atticus has the witness write his name on a sheet of paper and notices that the man is left-handed. Therefore he would be more likely to hit someone on the right side of their face.

Mayella herself testifies next, saying that she offered Tom Robinson a nickel to break up a dresser for her and once he was inside her house he took advantage of her. Atticus asks her how it was that Robinson managed to bruise the right side of her face when his left hand is paralyzed after an accident with a cotton gin when he was a child. Atticus cross examines Mayella asking her to admit that Tom did not rape her and that her father beat her. Upset, Mayella bursts into tears, refusing to answer any more questions.

Robinson testifys next, saying that he often helps the Ewells with small chores as he passes by their house on the way home from work. He tells the court that on the evening in question Mayella asked him inside to help fix a door but when he got inside he found that there was nothing wrong with the door. Mayella then asked him to grab a box down from a dresser and when he climbed up on a chair she seized hold of his legs. This scared him so much that he jumped down at which point she grabbed him around the waist and asked him to kiss her. Before he could react her father appeared at the window calling Mayella a whore and saying that he was going to kill her. Tom fled for his life.

The defense rests and Mr. Gilmer begins to question Tom. He gets Tom to admit not only that he has a former charge of disorderly conduct but that he possess the strength to choke a woman and dash her to the floor even with only one hand. He bullies Tom into admitting that he often helps Mayella with chores only because he feels sorry for her. This upsets the audience in the courtroom as, in Maycomb black people aren’t supposed to feel sorry for white people.

After Tom’s questioning is over, Atticus makes a personal appeal to the jury. He points out that the prosecution has only provided two questionable witnesses and no medical evidence. Also, that the physical evidence suggests that it was Bob Ewell who beat his daughter. He begins to tell a different story, a story of how Mayella, lonely and depressed, found herself lusting after a black man and then covered her shame by accusing him of rape. Atticus begs the jury not to fall for the Ewell’s lie and to see Tom Robinson for who he truly is and free him. The jury leaves to convene.
